[docs] "What's new in Svelte" January newsletter (#419)
sveltejs/sites: sites/svelte.dev/content/blog/2023-01-01-whats-new-in-svelte-january-2023.md

---
title: "What's new in Svelte: January 2022"

> description: "SvelteKit 1.0 release, directions in custom transitions and new HTML/Svelte typings"

Reviewer: directions in custom transitions doesn't feel as big as the other two to me. I don't think we have to have three
```suggestion
description: "SvelteKit 1.0 release and type definitions for Svelte elements."
```

> description: "SvelteKit 1.0 release, directions in custom transitions and new HTML/Svelte typings"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "SvelteKit 1.0, learn.svelte.dev, and type definitions for Svelte elements."
```

author: Dani Sandoval
authorURL: https://dreamindani.com
---

It's been just two weeks since the release of [SvelteKit 1.0](https://svelte.dev/blog/announcing-sveltekit-1.0)! If you haven't yet, check out the [livestream](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N4BRVkQVoMc), [new website](https://kit.svelte.dev/) and [learn.svelte.dev](https://learn.svelte.dev/) to learn all the features of SvelteKit step-by-step.

> Or, if you prefer, just [subscribe to this newsletter](https://svelte.substack.com/) 😉 Let's dive into the details...

Reviewer: I'm not sure this sentence really meshes with the rest. Subscribing will give you future updates, but it won't tell you about the stuff that happened this month, which you can just read below. I think if we were going to have a link we'd probably want to make it be https://svelte.dev/blog/rss.xml as the people who have chosen to read on svelte.dev might prefer to read it there in the future as well.
```suggestion
Let's dive into the details...
```

Author: Good call. Removing

## What's new in SvelteKit

> - @sveltejs/kit 1.0 is out! Starting from now all releases follow semver and changes will be listed as Major/Minor/Patch ([CHANGELOG](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/blob/master/packages/kit/CHANGELOG.md#100))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `@sveltejs/kit` 1.0 is out! All future releases will follow semver and changes will be listed as major/minor/patch in the [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/blob/master/packages/kit/CHANGELOG.md#100).
```

> - The Vite plugin is now split in two - replacing the need for an unnecessary middleware plugin ([#7990](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/7990))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Improved support for Storybook and Histoire ([#7990](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/7990)). Work is ongoing to fully support those tools ([storybook#20239](https://github.com/storybookjs/storybook/pull/20239)).
```

> - Kit's custom `svelte-preprocess` has been replaced by `vitePreprocess` ([#8036](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/8036))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `vitePreprocess` is now the default preprocessor. Please see [the docs](https://kit.svelte.dev/docs/integrations#preprocessors) for differences between `vitePreprocess` and `svelte-preprocess` ([#8036](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/8036)).
```

**Breaking changes:**

> - Unknown exports (except when starting with an underscore) are no longer allowed from +(layout|page)(.server)?.js and +server.js files ([#7878](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/7878))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Unknown exports (except when starting with an underscore) are no longer allowed from `+(layout|page)(.server)?.js` and `+server.js` files ([#7878](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/7878))
```

> - `__data.json` is now stripped from url ([#7979](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/7979))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `__data.json` is now stripped from URL ([#7979](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/7979))
```

> - `sveltekit()` will now return a promise of array of Vite plugins ([#7994](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/7994))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `sveltekit()` will now return a promise for an array of Vite plugins ([#7994](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/7994))
```

- A new `embedded` option, turned off by default, helps with link clicks when embedding SvelteKit ([docs](https://kit.svelte.dev/docs/configuration), [#7969](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/7969))
- Automatic fallback generation has been replaced with `builder.generateFallback(fallback)` ([#8013](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/8013))
- `invalid()` is now `fail()` and `ValidationError` is now `ActionFailure` ([#8012](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/8012))

> - Kit will now throw an error on invalid load response ([#8003](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/8003))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SvelteKit will now throw an error on invalid load response ([#8003](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/8003))
```

> - SvelteKit is now using Vite 4 and requires a Svelte peerDependency of ^3.54.0 ([#7543](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/7543))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SvelteKit is now using Vite 4 and requires a Svelte `peerDependency` of `^3.54.0` ([#7543](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/7543))
```

- Shells are now prerendered when `ssr` is false and `prerender` is not false - ensure prerender is false when ssr is also false ([#8131](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/8131))
- Warnings and errors about removed/changed APIs have been removed ([#8019](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/8019))

## What's new in Svelte
- The `options.direction` argument can now be passed to custom transition functions (**3.54.0**, [#3918](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/issues/3918))
- Variables can now be updated from a `@const` declared function (**3.54.0**, [#7843](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/issues/7843))

> - `svelte/elements` has been added for HTML/Svelte typings (**3.55.0**, [#7649](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/7649))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `svelte/elements` has been added for Svelte/HTML type definitions (**3.55.0**, [#7649](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/7649))
```

## What's new in Language Tools
The Svelte extension and language tools now have a few new minimum version requirements:
- Node version is now 16
- TypeScript version is now 4.9
- Svelte version is now 3.55

The following features have also been released:
- missing handler quick fix ([#1731](https://github.com/sveltejs/language-tools/pull/1731))
- add Svelte anchor missing attribute code action ([#1730](https://github.com/sveltejs/language-tools/pull/1730))
- better commit characters handling ([#1742](https://github.com/sveltejs/language-tools/pull/1742))
- add `--preserveWatchOutput` option ([#1715](https://github.com/sveltejs/language-tools/pull/1715))
- enhance Quickfixes to include Svelte Stores ([#1789](https://github.com/sveltejs/language-tools/pull/1789))

> - only show SvelteKit files context menu in kit project ([#1771](https://github.com/sveltejs/language-tools/pull/1771))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- only show SvelteKit files context menu in SvelteKit projects ([#1771](https://github.com/sveltejs/language-tools/pull/1771))
```

> - use satisfies operator if possible ([#1770](https://github.com/sveltejs/language-tools/pull/1770))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- use the `satisfies` operator if possible ([#1770](https://github.com/sveltejs/language-tools/pull/1770))
```

_To Watch_
- [SvelteKit is my mistress](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uEJ-Rnm2yOE) by Fireship
- [Sveltekit 1.0 in under 3 minutes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3KGKDgwIrkE) by Gui Bibeau
- [What Svelte UI Library Should You Use?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O0mNU0maItY) and [The Best Icon Library For Svelte (Iconify)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iGVhzsTZSa8) by Joy of Code

_To Read_
- [Rendering emails with Svelte](https://escape.tech/blog/sveltemails/) by Gautier Ben Aïm
- [Now That React is Dead, What’s the Next Big Thing?](https://javascript.plainenglish.io/now-that-react-js-is-dead-whats-the-next-big-thing-7fa72a36a69b) by Somnath Singh
- [What is SvelteKit? And Why Should You Care?](https://blog.tiia.rocks/what-is-sveltekit-and-why-should-you-care) by Tila
- [Sveltekit API endpoints](https://www.jefmeijvis.com/post/006-sveltekit-api-endpoints) by Jef Meijvis
- [Chart.js 4.0](https://github.com/chartjs/Chart.js/discussions/10977) has been released, with updated Svelte support
- [Creating A Custom Svelte Media Query Store](https://pqina.nl/blog/svelte-media-query-store/) by Rik Schennink

**Libraries, Tools & Components**

> - [Konsta UI](https://konstaui.com/) is pixel perfect mobile UI components built with Tailwind CSS for React, Vue & Svelte

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Konsta UI](https://konstaui.com/) is a library of pixel perfect mobile UI components built with Tailwind CSS for React, Vue & Svelte
```
